.ve-header "Thomas Edison's 1885 Diary" https://edisondigital.rutgers.edu/iiif/MA001 "July 1885" pct:30,30,60,40 center sticky - Home - About==placeholder=={Menlo Park N.J. and Woodside Villa July 12, 1885}==placeholder=={Menlo Park N.J. July 12, 1885}[]

# Thomas Edison’s 1885 Diary 

Edison enjoyed part of the summer of 1885 in Boston and environs, in the company of long-time friend Ezra Gilliland and his wife Lillian.  It is unclear if Edison’s first visit to the Gillilands' rented cottage Woodside Villa in Winthrop, on the shore of Boston Harbor, took place in early   in June; he returned to New York by 9 ==June=={description="Edison was with Ezra Gilliland in Boston early in June, perhaps for as long as a week, before he was back in New York on 9 June, and the two men may have spent some time in Winthrop."}. He set out once again for Winthrop via Boston on 18 June, was back in New York by 8 July, and seems to have returned to Menlo Park by 11 July. Two days later, Edison started again on an overnight journey, this time with his daughter Marion, to Boston and ultimately Winthrop, where he spent the week of 14–21 July with his daughter Marion and other guests. During this last visit, Edison and others in the party each kept a diary to be shared for their mutual entertainment.  

Edison's diary is the only known volume that he kept specifically to record thoughts and feelings of a personal nature.  It begins with events on 12 July, when he was still at Menlo Park, and continues with an account of his travels on 13–14 July (through New York City and Providence, Rhode Island). Edison composed these early entries retrospectively as he recorded his purchase of the diary books and pencils in Boston in his entry of July 15. Thereafter, the journal continues with accounts of the week's recreations, which included sailing, listening to music, and reading aloud.  Edison incorporated observations on literature, art, and religion, along with comments about his dreams, his health, and the weather.  

The diary may also be read as a courtship document. Edison's first wife, Mary, had died in August 1884. His daughter Marion later recalled that it was while traveling with the Gillilands to New Orleans and Florida in February and March 1885 that her father concluded "he wanted a home, a wife and a mother for his three children and asked Mrs. Gilliland, who lived in Boston, to introduce him to some suitable girls." The Gillilands seem to have arranged Edison's stay at Winthrop in order to introduce him to marriageable women of appropriate background.  Mrs. Gilliland ==invited=={description="Mina apparently was invited to
Winthrop sometime after Louise Igoe and Daisy Gaston. Those two longtime Indianapolis friends of the Gillilands knew their intentions by mid- April; Mina, six or seven years younger and a more recent acquaintance, made her plans a month later."} two—Grace "Daisy" Gaston and Louise M. Igoe—from her hometown of Indianapolis and another—Mina Miller, of more recent acquaintance—from Akron, Ohio.  Edison used the diary to signal—clearly but gently—to the Gillilands and the other young women his preference for Miss Miller, who would become his second wife in February 1886. 

Precisely when Edison and Mina were introduced has been a matter of dispute.  Newspapers at the time of their marriage made conflicting claims, which historians and biographers have sometimes used to reconstruct the story of their courtship. Mina herself, in a 1947 interview with Associated Press reporter Milton Marmor, said that she first met Edison at a "friend's" Boston apartment during a dinner party. "I was taking music at the time," Mina noted. "I never played for anybody but they asked me to play, and so I said, 'Oh, well, I'll never see these people again.' That was the first time we knew each other." She found Edison to be, on the basis of this first encounter, "a genial, lovely man."  Marmor then asked, "Do you remember after you first met Mr. Edison at the dinner in Boston whether anything developed that night? Did the romance develop then? To this, Mina replied somewhat ambiguously: 

No, I thought I would never see him again. Oh yes, then Mrs. Gilliland (that was just the close of the year of the term and they were going up to the beach home) and they wanted me to go for a week and so I wrote and asked father if I could go for a week and while I was there Mr. Edison came up.  

"I don't think that was an accident," Marmor observed. To which Mina responded, "I guess it was. Anyway, we enjoyed it there. I was there a week and he went there once in awhile." 

It is clear from Mina's account, which must be reckoned the most definitive, that she and Edison were introduced at the Gillilands' Boston apartment in the Hotel Huntington, 101 Milk Street, though the time of the meeting remains uncertain.  They could have met one Sunday in late January when they both were in Boston, though it is also possible that they met some other time in the winter or spring. Edison visited the Gillilands in Boston or Winthrop from the end of May through the first week of June and could have encountered her in that interval. 

Edison and Mina had occasion to deepen their acquaintance at the end of June or beginning of July.  He returned to the Gillilands' hospitality about 20 June and overlapped with Mina as their guest into early July.  The Boston Daily Globe noted on 28 June that Edison and Daisy Gaston were staying with the Gillilands at Winthrop, and his correspondence shows that he did not return to New York until 7 or 8 July.  For her part, Mina attended the Yale commencement on 25 June and the Yale-Harvard Boat Race in New London, Connecticut, the next day but was in Winthrop before 1 July.  She seems to have stayed with the Gillilands after Edison departed for New York.  However, she left Winthrop before Edison returned on the fourteenth. Although his acquaintance with Mina at Winthrop was brief, it was long enough for her to have made an indelible impression on the young widower, who soon after publicly signaled his affection toward her as "the Maid of Chataqua" (Doc. ZAF). 

 

 